HARVARD WORLD MODEL UNITED NATIONS
RULES OF PROCEDURE
GENERAL RULES
RULE 1: SCOPE
These rules for the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, and the Specialized Agencies are self-sufficient, except for modifications provided by the Secretariat, and will be considered adopted in advance of session. No other rules of procedure are applicable.
RULE 2: LANGUAGE
English will be the official and working language of the committee.
RULE 3: DELEGATIONS
Each member will be represented by one or two delegates and one vote on each committee.
RULE 4: CREDENTIALS
The credentials of all delegations have been accepted upon registration. Actions relating to the modification of rights, privileges, or credentials of any member may not be initiated without the written consent of the Secretary-General. Any representative to whose admission a member objects will provisionally be seated with the same rights as other representatives, pending a decision from the Secretary General.
RULE 5: PARTICIPATION OF NON-MEMBERS
Representatives of Accredited Observers will have the same rights as those of full members, except that they may not sign or vote on draft resolutions or amendments. A representative of a state organization that is not a member of the United Nations or an Accredited Observer may address a committee only with the prior approval of the Director.
RULE 6: STATEMENTS BY THE SECRETARIAT
The Secretary General or a member of the Secretariat designated by him/her may at any time make either written or oral statements to the committee.
RULE 7: GENERAL POWERS OF THE COMMITTEE STAFF
The Committee Director will declare the opening and closing of each meeting and may propose the adoption of any procedural motion to which there is no significant objection. The Director, subject to these rules, will have complete control of the proceedings at any meeting. The Director will also direct discussions, accord the right to speak, put questions, announce decisions, rule on points of order, and ensure and enforce the observance of these rules. The Director may temporarily transfer his or her duties to another member of the Committee staff. Committee staff members may also advise delegations on the possible course of debate. In the exercise of these functions, the Committee staff will be at all times subject to these rules and responsible to the Secretary General.
RULE 8: QUORUM
1
The Director may declare a Committee open and permit debate to proceed when at least one-quarter of the members of the Committee (as declared at the beginning of the first session) are present.
A member of the Committee is a representative who is officially registered with the Conference. The presence of a majority of the members will be required for the vote on any substantive motion. A quorum will be assumed to be present unless specifically challenged and shown to be absent. A roll call is never required to determine the presence of a quorum.
RULE 9: COURTESY
Delegates will show courtesy and respect to the Committee staff and to other delegates. The Director will immediately call to order any delegate who fails to comply with this rule.
RULES GOVERNING DEBATE
RULE 10: AGENDA
The first order of business for the Committee will be consideration of the Agenda.
• A motion should be made to put a topic area first on the agenda. This motion requires a second.
• The only topic areas that may be proposed for the agenda are those listed in the preparation materials. The Director may modify these topic areas at his or her discretion
• A committee in which only one topic area may be proposed for the agenda will be considered to have automatically adopted that topic area without debate.
• A Speakers List will be established ‘for’ and ‘against’ the motion; speakers ‘for’ will speak in support of the topic area suggested, speakers ‘against’ will speak in favor of the other topic area.
• A motion to close debate will be in order after the Committee has heard from two speakers for the motion and from two against, or all the speakers on one side and at least two on the opposite side. In accordance with the normal procedure described in Rule 14, the Director will recognize two speakers against the motion to close debate, and a vote of two-thirds is required for closure of debate on the agenda. If the Speakers List on setting the agenda is exhausted, debate will automatically be closed even if a motion to close debate would not normally be in order.
• When debate is closed, the Committee will move to an immediate vote on the motion. A simple majority is required for passage. If the motion fails, the other topic area will automatically be placed first on the agenda.
• In the event of an international crisis or emergency, the Secretary General or his/her representative may call upon a committee to table debate on the current topic area so that the more urgent matter may be attended to immediately. After a draft resolution has been passed on the crisis topic, the committee will return to debate on the tabled topic. If a draft resolution on the crisis topic fails, the committee may return to debate on the tabled topic area only at the discretion of the Secretary General or his/her representative.
• All motions for caucus shall be ruled dilatory during the Consideration of the Agenda. Also, delegates will not be allowed to yield their time (Rule 21).
2
RULE 11: DEBATE
After the Agenda has been determined, one continuously open Speakers List will be established for the purpose of general debate. This Speakers List will be followed for all debate on the Topic Area, except when superseded by procedural motions, amendments, or the introduction of a draft resolution. Speakers may speak generally on the Topic Area being considered and may address any draft resolution currently on the floor.
RULE 12: UNMODERATED CAUCUS
A motion for an unmoderated caucus is in order at any time when the floor is open, prior to closure of debate. The delegate making the motion must briefly explain its purpose and specify a time limit for the caucus, not to exceed twenty minutes. The motion will immediately be put to a vote. A majority of members is required for passage. The Director may rule the motion out of order.
RULE 13: MODERATED CAUCUS
The purpose of the moderated caucus is to facilitate substantive debate at critical junctures in the discussion. In a moderated caucus, the Director will temporarily depart from the Speakers List and call on delegates to speak at his/her discretion. A motion for a moderated caucus is in order at any time when the floor is open, prior to closure of debate. The delegate making the motion must briefly explain its purpose and specify a time limit for the caucus, not to exceed twenty minutes, and a time limit for the individual speeches. Once raised, the motion will be voted on immediately, with a majority of members required for passage. The Director may rule the motion out of order. O motions are in order during a moderated caucus. If no delegate wishes to speak during a moderated caucus, the caucus shall immediately end.
RULE 14: CLOSURE OF DEBATE
When the floor is open, a delegate may move to close debate on the substantive or procedural matter under discussion. Delegates ay move to close debate on the general topic, debate on the agenda, or debate on an amendment. The Director may rule such a motion dilatory. When closure of debate is moved, the Director may recognize up to two speakers against the motion. No speaker in favor of the motion will be recognized. Closure of debate requires the support of two-thirds of the members present. If the Committee is in favor of closure, the Director will declare the closure of the debate, and move the committee to immediate voting procedure.
RULE 15: SUSPENSION OR ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING
Whenever the floor is open, a delegate may move for the suspension of the meeting, to suspend all Committee functions until the next meeting, or for the adjournment of the meeting, to suspend all Committee functions for the duration of the Conference. The Director may rule such motions out of order. When in order, such motions will not be debatable but will be immediately put to the vote, barring any motions taking precedence, and will require a majority to pass. A motion to adjourn will be out of order prior to the lapse of three-quarters of the time allotted for the last meeting of the Committee.
3
RULE 16: POSTPONEMENT AND RESUMPTION OF DEBATE
Whenever the floor is open, a delegate may move for the postponement of debate on a draft resolution, amendment, or topic currently on the floor. The motion, otherwise known as "tabling," will require a two-thirds vote to pass and will be debatable to the extent of one speaker in favor and one opposed. No debate or action will be allowed on any draft resolution, amendment, or topic on which debate has been postponed. A motion to resume debate on an amendment, draft resolution, or topic on which debate has been postponed will require a majority to pass and will be debatable to the extent of one speaker in favor and one opposed. Resumption of debate will cancel the effects of postponement of debate. The Director has discretion over postponement of debate.
RULE 17: RECONSIDERATION
A motion to reconsider is in order when a draft resolution or amendment has been adopted or rejected, and must be made by a member who voted with the majority on the proposal. The Director will recognize two speakers opposing the motion after which the motion will be immediately put to a vote. A two-thirds majority of the members present is required for reconsideration. If the motion passes, the committee will immediately vote again on the draft resolution or amendment being reconsidered.
S
RULES GOVERNING SPEECHES
RULE 18: SPEAKERS LIST
The Committee will have an open Speakers List for the Topic Area being discussed. The director will either set a speaker’s time or entertain motions to set a speaking time. Separate Speakers Lists will be established as needed for procedural motions and debate on amendments. A country may add its name to the Speakers List by submitting a request in writing to the Director, provided that country is not already on the Speakers List, and may remove its name from the Speakers List by submitting a request in writing to the Director. At any time the Director may call for members that wish to be added to the Speakers List. The names of the next several countries to speak will always be posted for the convenience of the Committee. The Speakers List for the second topic area will not be open until the Committee has proceeded to that topic. A motion to close any Speakers List is never in order.
RULE 19: SPEECHES
No delegate may address a session without having previously obtained the permission of the Director. The Director may call a speaker to order if his/her remarks are not relevant to the subject under discussion, or are offensive to committee members or staff.
RULE 20: TIME LIMIT ON SPEECHES
The Director may limit the time allotted to each speaker. The minimum time limit will be ten seconds. When a delegate exceeds his/her allotted time, the Director may call the speaker to order without delay.
RULE 21: YIELDS
A delegate granted the right to speak on a substantive issue may yield in one of three ways at the conclusion of his/her speech: to another delegate, to questions, or to the Director.
4
Please note that only one yield is allowed. A delegate must declare any yield at the conclusion of his or her speech.
• Yield to another delegate. His or her remaining time will be offered to that delegate. If the delegate accepts the yield, the Director shall recognize the delegate for the remaining time. To turn he floor over to a co-delegate of the same member state is not considered a yield.
• Yield to questions. Questioners will be selected by the Director and limited to one question each. Follow-up questions will be allowed only at the discretion of the Director. The Director will have the right to call to order any delegate whose question is, in the opinion of the Director, rhetorical and leading and not designed to elicit information. Only the speaker’s answers to questions will be deducted from the speaker’s remaining time.
• Yield to the director. Such a yield should be made if the delegate does not wish his/her speech to be subject to questions. The moderator will then move to the next speaker.
Only one yield is allowed per speech (i.e. no yields on yielded time). There are no yields allowed if the delegate is speaking on a procedural matter or his/her time has expired. A Delegate must declare any yield by the conclusion of his/her speech. If no yield is made, a yield to the director will be automatically assumed.
RULE 22: RIGHT OF REPLY
A delegate whose personal or national integrity has been impugned by another delegate may submit a Right of Reply only in writing to the committee staff. The Director will grant the Right of Reply and his or her discretion and a delegate granted a Right of Reply will not address the committee except at the request of the Director.
POINTS
RULES GOVERNING POINTS
RULE 23: POINTS OF PERSONAL PRIVILEGE:
Whenever a delegate experiences personal discomfort which impairs his or her ability to participate in the proceedings, he or she may rise to a Point of Personal Privilege to request that the discomfort be corrected. While a Point of Personal Privilege in extreme case may interrupt a speaker, delegates should use this power with the utmost discretion.
RULE 24: POINTS OF ORDER:
During the discussion of any matter, a delegate may rise to a Point of Order to indicate an instance of improper parliamentary procedure. The Point of Order will be immediately decided by the Director in accordance with these rules of procedure. The Director may rule out of order those points that are improper. A representative rising to a Point of Order may not speak on the substance of the matter under discussion. A Point of Order may only interrupt a speaker if the speech is not following proper parliamentary procedure.
RULE 25: POINTS OF PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY
When the floor is open, a delegate may rise to a Point of Parliamentary Inquiry to ask the Director a question regarding the rules of procedure. A Point of Parliamentary Inquiry may never interrupt a speaker. Delegates with substantive questions should not rise to this Point, but should rather approach the committee staff during caucus or send a note to the dais.
5
RULES GOVERNING THE PATH TO A DRAFT RESOLUTION
RULE 26: WORKING PAPERS
Delegates may propose working papers for committee consideration. Working papers are intended to aid the Committee in its discussion and formulation of draft resolutions and need not be written in draft resolution format. Working papers are not official documents, but do require the signature of the Director to be copied and distributed. Once distributed, delegates may begin to refer to that working paper by its designated number, but otherwise debated proceeds normally on the topic.
RULE 27: DRAFT RESOLUTIONS
A draft resolution may be introduced when it receives the approval of the Director and is signed 20 members in the General Assembly, 10 members in the Economic and Social Council and Regional Bodies, or 5 members in Security Council Simulations. Signing a draft resolution need not indicate support of the draft resolution, and the signatory has no further obligations. Signing a draft resolution only indicates a desire for the draft resolution to be discussed in committee. There are no official sponsors of draft resolutions. A Draft resolution requires a simple majority to members voting pass. Only one draft resolution will be passed per topic area. After a draft resolution is passed, voting procedure will end and the committee will move directly into the second topic area.
RULE 28: INTRODUCTION OF DRAFT RESOLUTIONS
Once a draft resolution has been approved as stipulated above and has been copied and distributed, a delegate(s) may motion to introduce the draft resolution. The Director, time permitting, shall read the operative clauses of the draft resolution. A procedural vote is then taken to determine whether the resolution shall be introduced. Should the motion received the simple majority required to pass, the draft resolution will be considered introduced and on the floor. The Director, at his or her discretion, may answer any clarificatory points on the draft resolution. Any substantive points will be ruled out of order during this period, and the Director may end this ‘clarificatory question-answer period’ for any reason, including tie constraints. More than one draft resolution may be on the floor at any one time, but at most one draft resolution may be passed per Topic Area. A draft resolution will remain on the floor until debate on that specific draft resolution is postponed or closed or a draft resolution on that Topic Area has been passed. Debate on draft resolutions proceeds according to the general Speakers List for that topic area and delegates may then refer to the draft resolution by its designated number. No delegate may refer to a draft resolution until it is formally introduced.
RULE 29: AMENDMENTS
Delegates may amend any draft resolution that has been introduced. Only one amendment may be introduced at any given time. An amendment must have the approval of the Director and the signatures of 12 members in the General Assembly, 5 members in the Economic Social Council and the Regional Bodies, or 3 members in Security Council simulations. Amendments to amendments are out order; however, an amended part of a draft resolution may be further amended. There are no official sponsors of amendments or friendly amendments. Preambulatory phrases may not be amended. The final vote on the
6
amendment is procedural; however NGOs and Observer Nations will not be able to vote on amendments.
• A motion to introduce an approved amendment may be introduced when the floor is open. If the motion receives the simple majority required to pass, the Director will read the amendment aloud, time permitting. General Debate will be suspended and a Speakers List will be established for and against the amendment.
• A motion to close debate will be in order after the Committee has heard from two speakers for the amendment and from two speakers against or from all the speakers on one side and at least two on the other side.
• Following the normal procedure of Rule 14, the Director will recognize two speakers against the motion to close debate, and a vote of two-thirds is required for closure.
• When debate is closed on the amendment, the Committee will move to an immediate vote. Amendments need a simple majority to pass.
After the vote, debate will resume according to the general Speakers List.
RULES GOVERNING VOTING
RULE 30: PROCEDURAL VOTING
All voting is considered procedural with the exception of voting on draft resolutions. Delegates must vote on all procedural motions, and no abstentions are allowed. A motion that requires a simple majority needs more than half of the committee members to vote affirmatively. A motion that requires two-thirds to pass requires exactly two-thirds of the committee members to vote affirmatively. If there is not the required number of speakers for/against a motion, the motion will automatically fail/pass.
RULE 31: SUBSTANTIVE VOTING
The only substantive voting will be voting on draft resolutions. All other votes will be procedural votes. After debate has been closed on the general topic area, the committee will move into substantive voting procedures and the chambers are then sealed. At that point, only the following points and motions will be entertained: Division of the Question, Reordering Draft Resolutions, Motion for a Roll Call Vote, Point of Personal Privilege, Point of Parliamentary Inquiry and Point of Order. If there are no such motions, the committee will vote on all draft resolutions. For substantive voting, each country will have one vote. Each vote may be a ‘Yes,’ ‘No,’ or ‘Abstain.’ Members who abstain from voting are considered as not voting. All matters will be voted upon using placards by default, except if a motion for a roll call vote is accepted. A simple majority requires ‘Yes’ voted from more than half of the members voting (i.e. more affirmative votes than negative votes). Once any resolution has been passed, the voting procedure is closed, as only one resolution may be passed in a topic area. In Security Council Simulations, the five permanent members have the power to veto any substantive vote.
RULE 32: REORDERING DRAFT RESOLUTIONS
A Motion to Reorder Draft resolutions will only be in order immediately after entering voting procedure, and before voting has started on any draft resolutions. If the motion receives the simple majority required to pass the Director will take all motions to reorder draft resolutions and then vote on them in the order in which they came. Voting will continue until either a motion passes, receiving a simple majority, or all of the motions fail,
7
in which case the committee will move into voting procedure, voting on the draft resolutions in their original order. Only one motion to reorder draft resolutions is in order in each round of voting procedures.
RULE 33: DIVISION OF THE QUESTION
After debate on any topic has been closed, a delegate may move that operative parts of a draft resolution be voted on separately. Preambulatory clauses and sub-operative clauses may not be removed by division of the question.
• The motion can be debated to the extent of at most two speakers for and two against, to be followed by an immediate procedural vote on that motion.
• If the motion receives the simple majority required to pass, the Director will take motions on how to divide the question and prioritize them from most severe to least severe.
• The committee will then vote on the motions in the order set by the Director. If no division passes, the resolution remains intact. Once a division, requiring a simple majority, has been passed, the resolution will be divided accordingly, and a separate procedural vote (implying no abstentions) will be taken on each divided part to determine whether or not it is included in the final draft. If all of the operative parts of the substantive proposal are rejected, the draft resolution will be considered to have been rejected as a whole.
• Parts of the draft resolution that are subsequently passed will be recombined into a final document. The final document will be put to a substantive vote as a whole, requiring a simple majority of those voting ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to pass.
RULE 34: ROLL CALL VOTING
After debate is closed on any draft resolution, any delegate may request a roll call vote. Such a motion may be made from the floor, seconded by 20 members of the General Assembly, 10 members of the Economic and Social Council and 5 members of Specialized Agencies. A motion for a roll call vote is in order only for substantive votes.
• In a roll call vote, the Director will call countries in alphabetical order starting with a selected member.
• In the first sequence, delegates may vote “Yes,” “No,” “Abstain,” or “Pass.” A delegate may request the right to explain his or her vote only when the delegate is voting against the policy of his or her country; such a vote is termed ‘with Rights.’ The delegate may only explain an affirmative or negative vote, not an abstention from voting.
• A delegate who passes during the first sequence of the roll call must vote (i.e. may not abstain or pass) during the second sequence. The same delegate may not request the right to explain his/her vote.
• All delegates who had requested the right of explanation will be granted time to explain their votes. The speaking time will be set at the discretion of the Director, not to exceed thirty seconds.
• The Director will then announce the outcome of the vote.
S
PRECEDENCE OF MOTIONS
Motions will be considered in the following order of preference:
1. Point of Personal Privilege (Rule 23)
2. Point of Order (Rule 24)
3. Point of Parliamentary Inquiry (Rule 25)
4. Adjournment of the Meeting (Rule 15)
8
5. Suspension of the Meeting (Rule 15)
6. Unmoderated Caucusing (Rule 12)
7. Moderated Caucusing (Rule 13)
8. Introduction of Draft Resolution (Rule 28)
9. Introduction of an Amendment (Rule 29)
10. Postponement of Debate (Rule 16)
11. Resumption of Debate (Rule 16)
12. Closure of Debate (Rule 14)
At the start of voting procedure, the following points and motions are in order, in the following order of precedence:
1. Point of Personal Privilege (Rule 23)
2. Point of Order (Rule 24)
3. Point of Parliamentary Inquiry (Rule 25)
4. Reordering Draft Resolutions (Rule 32)
5. Division of the Question (Rule 33)
6. Motion for a Roll Call Vote (Rule 34)
9
FORMAT OF DRAFT RESOLUTIONS
HEADING
The title should be centered, in capital letters, above the main body of the draft resolution. The title can be as simple as “DRAFT RESOLUTION.” On the left margin and two lines below the title should be the committee and topic name. NOTE: There are no sponsors of a draft resolution. The signatures are only there to show that the committee wants to discuss the draft resolution. The names of “authors” should not be included.
BODY
The draft resolution is written in the format of a long sentence, with the following rules:
• The draft resolution begins with The General Assembly for all GA committees and with The Economic and Social Council for all ECOSOC committees. The Specialized Agencies use their own names as the introductory line. The rest of the draft resolution consists of clauses with the first word of each clause underlined.
• The next section, consisting of Preambulatory Clauses, describes the problem being addressed, recalls past actions taken, explains the purpose of the draft resolution, and offers support for the operative clauses that follow. Each clause in the preamble begins with an underlined word and ends with a comma.
• Operative Clauses are numbered and state the action to be taken by the body. These clauses are all with the present tense active verbs and are generally stronger words than those used in the Preamble. Each operative clause is followed by a semi-colon except the last, which ends with a period.
SAMPLE PREAMBULATORY/OPENING CLAUSES
Affirming
Alarmed by
Approving
Aware of
Bearing in mind
Believing
Cognizant of
Confident
Contemplating
Convinced
Declaring
Deeply concerned
Deeply conscious
Deeply convinced
Deeply disturbed
Deeply regretting
Desiring
Emphasizing
Expecting
Expressing its appreciation
Expressing its satisfaction
Fulfilling
Fully alarmed
Fully aware
Fully believing
Further developing
Further recalling
Guided by
Having adopted
Having considered
Having considered further
Having devoted attention
Having examined
Having heard
10
Having received
Having studied
Keeping in mind
Noting further
Noting further
Noting with approval
Noting with deep concern
Noting with regret
Noting with satisfaction
Observing
Reaffirming
Realizing
Recalling
Recognizing
Referring
Seeking
Taking into account
Taking note
Viewing with appreciation
Welcoming
SAMPLE OPERATIVE CLAUSES
Accepts
Affirms
Approves
Authorizes
Calls for
Calls upon
Condemns
Confirms
Congratulates
Considers
Declares accordingly
Deplores
Designates
Draws attention
Emphasizes
Encourages
Endorses
Expresses its appreciation
Expresses its hope
Further invites
Further proclaims
Further recommends
Further reminds
Further requests
Further resolves
Has resolved
Notes
Proclaims
Reaffirms
Recommends
Regrets
Reminds
Requests
Resolves
Solemnly affirms
Strongly condemns
Supports
Takes note of
Trusts
Urges
11
SAMPLE DRAFT RESOLUTION
Draft Resolution 1.1
Commission on Science and Technology
International Newsflow Imbalance
The Economic and Social Council,
Recalling its Resolution A/36/89 of 16 December 1981, “The Declaration on Fundamental Principles Concerning the Contribution of the Mass Media to Peace and International Understanding,”
Recalling also Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, “Everyone has the right to...receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers,”
Recognizing that the problem of news flows imbalance is that two-way information among countries of a region is either nonexistent or insufficient and information exchanged between regions of the world is inadequate,
Realizing the need for all Sovereign Nations to maintain their integrity and still play an active role in the international system,
1) Recommends that a three-level information interchange system be established on the National, Regional, and International levels to ameliorate the current problems of news flow imbalance, with the three-level system operating as follows:
a) Each region’s member nations will report their national information and receive the information of other nations in their region from the regional level of this interchange system;
b) Nations will decide the character of the news flow media best suited to the need of their sovereign territory, be this printed, audio, or audio-visual;
c) Regional News Gathering Agencies will serve to gather information from the nations in their region, and these boards will have no editorial discretion and will serve to forward all information to the International Board;
d) Each regional agency will be composed of representatives from every member nation of the region;
e) The primary function of the International Board will be to translate information accumulated from the regional news gathering agencies;
f) The secondary purpose will be to transmit all information gathered back to the member nations via the regional news gathering agencies;
2) Urges the establishment of the University of International Communications, with main branch in Geneva, Switzerland, and additional branches located in each of the aforementioned regions, to pursue the following aims:
12
a) The University and branches will be established with the express purpose of bringing together world views and facilitating the transfer of technology;
b) All member nations of the United Nations will be equally represented at the University;
c) Incentives will be offered to students of journalism and communications at the University to return to their countries to teach upon completion of instruction;
d) The instructors of the regional education centers will be comprised of multi-partisan coalition of educators from throughout the world;
3) Calls for the continued use of funds from the International Program for the Development of Communications, Special Account, UNESCO, the UN Development Program, and other sources of funding including national governments and private donors;
4) Recommends that the distribution of funds be decided by the IPDC.
13