1. Scope:
Cambridge University Model United Nations (CUMUN) rules are self-sufficient. Any
interpretation shall be reserved exclusively to the Secretary General or designated members of the
Secretariat. These rules are to be considered adopted in advance of the Conference. No other Rules
of Procedure are applicable.
2. Language and Attire:
The official and working language of the conference is English. While in session, delegates are
required to wear professional business attire, or smart national dress if appropriate.
3. General Powers of the Chair:
In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon the Chair, the Chair shall declare the opening
and closing of each meeting, direct discussions, accord the right to speak, put all questions to a
vote, and announce decisions. He or she may also Recess or Adjourn the Committee at his or her
own discretion. The Chair shall ensure and enforce observance of these Rules, and subject to them,
shall rule on Points of Order. He or she shall have complete control of the proceedings, in all the
Committee sessions. In the exercise of these functions, the Chair is at all times subject to these
Rules and responsible to the Secretary General.
4. Powers of the Secretariat:
The Secretariat shall interpret these Rules and their ramifications in accordance with the principles
of Cambridge University. They may also advise the Delegates on possible courses of Debate.
5. Special Rights and Privileges of the Secretary General and Chairs:
The Secretary General may at any time suspend or otherwise change any part of the Rules of
Procedure in order to insure smooth functioning of the Model United Nations. He / She maintains
full discretion over the interpretation of rules, and appointment and supervision of rights and
Chairpersons.
6. Statements by the Secretariat:
The Secretary-General, or a designated representative member of the Secretariat, may at any time
address the Committee.
7. Quorum:
The Chair may declare a session open and permit Debate when at least one quarter of the Delegates
are present. The presence of a majority shall be required for any Substantive decision to be taken.
A Quorum shall be assumed present unless specifically challenged and shown to be absent.
8. Delegations:
One voting Delegate shall represent each member nation. In addition, Delegations may include
(subject to the approval of the secretariat) only one alternate representative.
9. Caucusing:
No Caucusing shall be allowed in the General Assembly. Members who wish to call for Caucus
may rise to the motion at any time other than when another Delegate has the floor. Chair has
discretion.
10. Agenda:
The Secretary General prior to the session shall determine the Agenda for each session of the
General Assembly.
The first order of business for the Committee will be the consideration of the Agenda. A motion
should be made to put an Agenda Item first. This motion requires a second. If no delegate wishes to
oppose the motion, it shall be considered adopted. If there is opposition, a speakers’ list will be
established for and against the motion.
A motion to close debate will be in order after the Committee has heard two speakers for the motion
and two against; or, in case only one delegate wishes to oppose the motion, one speaker for and one
speaker against the motion shall be considered where after a motion to close debate shall be
entertained. In accordance with the procedure described in Rule 19, the Director will recognize one
speaker for and one against the motion to close debate, and a vote of two-thirds in favour is required
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY MODEL UNITED NATIONS
RULES OF PROCEDURE
Page 3 of 10
for closure of debate on the Agenda.
When debate is closed, the Committee will move to an immediate vote on the motion. A simple
majority of all members present or present and voting is required for passage. If the motion fails, the
other Agenda Item will automatically be placed first on the Agenda.
In the event of an international crisis or emergency, the Secretary General or his or her representative
may call upon a Committee to table debate on the current Agenda Item so that the more urgent matter
may be attended to immediately. After a resolution has been passed on the crisis topic, the
Committee will return to debate on the tabled Agenda Item. If a resolution on the crisis topic fails,
the Committee may return to debate on the tabled Agenda Item only at the discretion of the Secretary
General or his or her representative.
The vote described in this rule is a procedural vote and hence all delegates will be required to cast a
vote. There shall be no abstentions.
11. Formal Roll Call:
To begin each session of the Committee, a Formal Roll Call of all Delegates ‘Present’ or ‘Present
and Voting’ will be undertaken. An indication of being ‘Present and Voting’ will require that the
member state not abstain on a vote on the substantive matter.
12. Distinction between motions:
All motions, with the exception of amendments and resolutions, will be deemed procedural in
nature. Amendments and resolutions will both be considered substantive motions and as such can
be abstained on while voting. Abstentions will be out of order for procedural matters.
II. DEBATE
13. Speaker's List in Committee:
After the Agenda has been determined, one continuously open speakers’ list will be established for
the purpose of general debate. This speakers’ list will be followed for all debate on the Agenda Item,
except when superseded by procedural motions or a debate on amendments. Speakers may speak
generally on the Agenda Item being considered and may address any resolution currently on the
floor.
The Speaker's List shall be determined by a show of placards. Separate Speaker's Lists shall be
established by the Chair for Amendments and for specific procedural Motions as the need arises. The
Chair at any time may require that requests be written. Delegates must clearly indicate the Speaker's
List on to which they wish to be placed. The Chair shall display/read the Speaker's List for the issue
currently before the Committee, be it a Resolution or an Amendment.
14. Closure of the Speakers’ List:-
At any point during debate a delegate may move to close the speakers’ list. Such motion shall not be
debated, but put to an immediate vote, requiring the support of a majority of the members present or
present and voting to pass. A closed speakers’ list can be reopened at any time prior to voting
procedures by a simple majority of all members present or present and voting. When there are no
more speakers, the Chair shall declare the debate closed.
15. Debate in General Assembly:
In General Assembly there will be closed debate, where there is a given amount of time allotted to
speak in favour and a given amount of time against the resolution.
16. Speeches:
No Delegate may address the Committee or the General Assembly without having previously
obtained the permission of the Chair. The Chair may call a Delegate to Order if his or her remarks
are not relevant to the subject under discussion.
17. Time Limit on Speeches:
The Chair may limit the time allowed to each Speaker and the number of times that Delegates may
speak on any question. There is no minimum time limit. The maximum time limit will be set by the
Chairperson. When the Debate is limited and a speaker exceeds the allotted time, the Chair shall
call him or her to Order without delay.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY MODEL UNITED NATIONS
RULES OF PROCEDURE
Page 4 of 10
18. Yields:
A Delegate who has been granted the right to speak on a Substantive issue may Yield a portion of
that right to another specified Delegate. Only one consecutive yielding is in order. Yieldings must
be approved by the Chair. The second speaker may then utilize the balance of the overall time
period, but may not Yield time to any other Delegate, including the original Delegate yielding
time. There shall be no Yields on Procedural Motions. Yields need not be indicated while the
Speaker's List is being drawn up. They may be made by the Delegate at the podium at the end of a
speech.
Delegates may also yield their remaining time to points of information from the floor, and are
encouraged to do so.
19. Closure of Debate:
In Committee, Motions for Closure of Debate, if objected to, requires one speaker 'For' and one
speaker 'Against' and the votes of 2/3 of the Delegates present and voting. During Debate on a
Resolution, a Motion for Closure of Debate is in order only when the committee has heard at least
two speakers 'For' and two 'Against', or all speakers on one side and at least two on the opposing
side. Any item upon which Debate has been closed shall be brought to an immediate vote. Closure
of Debate is automatic if a particular Substantive Speaker's List has been exhausted, unless a
Motion to reopen the Speaker's List is passed by a majority. Closure of Debate is also automatic on
Procedural Motions when the specific number of Speakers has been heard. In both of these cases,
the matter upon which Debate has been closed shall be brought to an immediate vote.
20. Moderated Caucus:
To be used to move into a less formal active forum of between 5-20 minutes. The Speakers’ List is
suspended and delegates raise their placards if they wish to and are called upon by the Chair. The
Chair or any delegate may introduce this motion, providing an overall time limit (5-20 minutes),
individual speech time limits (30 seconds to 2 minutes) and a reason for the moderated caucus. The
passage of this motion requires a simple majority and may be ruled out of order by the Chair. One
point of information may be entertained per speaker, although at the Chair’s discretion this may be
extended.
21. Unmoderated Caucus:
To be used as a break from the formal debate, where delegates may move freely around the
committee room to discuss matters informally and in groups. A rationale and time period (5-20
minutes) must be given by the delegation proposing the caucus. The passage of this motion requires a
simple majority and may be ruled out of order by the Chair.
22. Tabling / Postponement of Debate:
A Motion to Question the Competence of a Resolution or Amendment through Tabling must be
made when that Resolution or Amendment is on the floor. The Motion is Debatable to the extent of
one speaker 'For' and one 'Against'; passage requires a two-thirds vote of Delegates present or
present and voting. If this Motion passes, the Resolution is declared “tabled”. Tabling is accepted
procedure during a Committee session but is not part of the General Assembly.
23. Resumption of Debate:
A motion to resume debate on an amendment or resolution on which debate has been tabled will
require a majority to pass and will be debatable to the extent of one speaker in favour and one
opposed. Resumption of debate will cancel the effects of tabling.
24. Adjournment of Debate / Change the Agenda:
A delegate may at any time move the adjournment of debate on the Agenda Item under discussion.
Permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded only to two delegates favouring and two
opposing the adjournment, or in case only one delegate wishes to oppose the motion, one speaker for
and one speaker against the motion shall be considered where after the motion shall be put to a vote
immediately, requiring the support of a majority of the members present or present and voting to
pass. If a motion for adjournment passes, the Agenda Item is considered dismissed and no action will
be taken on it.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY MODEL UNITED NATIONS
RULES OF PROCEDURE
Page 5 of 10
This motion, if successful, means that the Committee proceeds to the second Agenda Item under
discussion. The Director may at his or her discretion rule this motion out of order, if the Committee
has already moved to the second Agenda Item. The decision of Director is not open to appeal. For the
purpose of this rule the term ‘Agenda Item’ solely refers to the two Agenda Items set by the
Secretary General.
25. Reconsideration of an Agenda Item:
When an Agenda Item has been adjourned, it may not be reconsidered at the same session unless the
Committee, by a two-thirds majority of those present or present and voting, so decides.
Reconsideration can only be moved by a delegate who voted on the prevailing side of the original
motion to adjourn. Permission to speak on a motion to reconsider shall be accorded to one speaker
for and one speaker opposing the motion, after which it shall be put to a vote immediately.
26. Reconsideration of a Substantive Matter:
A motion to reconsider is in order when a resolution or amendment has been adopted or rejected, and
must be made by a member who voted with the majority on the substantive proposal. The Chair will
recognise him for 30 seconds as to why the matter should be reconsidered after which the motion
will be immediately put to a vote. A two-thirds majority of the members present or present and
voting is required for reconsideration.
III. SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES
27. Resolution:
Delegates may propose Resolutions for Committee consideration in any of the designated topic
areas. Authors of a Resolution will be called its sponsors. The names of the Sponsors and
Cosponsors of a Resolution shall appear in the heading of the printed Resolution.
To reach the floor, Resolutions must be typed in the correct forms, receive approval from the
committee chairs and must be co-sponsored (signed) by at least one fifth of the members that are
present or present and voting at the beginning of Committee session. Co-sponsoring a resolution
does not indicate support of the resolution and the co-sponsor has no further obligations. The first
Speaker will read the Operative Clauses to the Committee.
More than one resolution maybe on the floor at any one time, but at most one resolution maybe
passed per Agenda item. Debate on resolutions proceeds according to the Agenda Item general
speaker’s list. A resolution will remain on the floor until debate on that specific resolution is
postponed or closed or a resolution on that Agenda Item has been passed. A motion to introduce a
resolution is procedural in nature, and hence does not require a delegate to be on the speakers’ list.
28. Amendments:
In Committee only, a Delegate may move to Amend any Resolution that has been introduced. An
amendment is an addition, deletion, or adjustment to an existing text that seeks to strengthen a
resolution. All Amendments must be in writing.
Friendly Amendments, if agreed on by all co-submitters of the resolution, passes. It entails small,
non-substantive changes (one or two words, or the correction of a typo / grammatical mistake). It
may not seek to alter the content of the resolution in any way significant and will be allowed only
at the discretion of the chair.
An Amendment to any Resolution may be introduced when the Resolution is under consideration
(on the floor) and the floor is open. Amendments must have the signed support of one-eighth of the
committee members to be considered. It may be made to operative clauses only. It may change
only less than a quarter of the operative clauses. An amendment form must be filled in and sent to
the chair. The form must state clearly which part of the text is to be amended and what is to be
amended. The form must indicate the wording of the amendment. The amendment will only be
entertained if and only if the above have been satisfied, and the Chair has approved the amendment
itself.
A delegate may move their amendment at any time the floor is open, at which point the Chair will
suspend general debate and will call upon the delegate to communicate the changes to the
committee. The delegate will then be invited by the Chair to be the first speaker on the separate
Speakers’ List created for debate on the amendment. A motion to close debate will be in order after
the Committee has heard two speakers for the amendment and two against; or in case only one
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY MODEL UNITED NATIONS
RULES OF PROCEDURE
Page 6 of 10
delegate wishes to oppose the motion, one speaker for and one speaker against the motion shall be
considered where after a motion to close debate shall be entertained.
When debate is closed on the amendment, the Committee will move to an immediate vote. After
the vote, debate on the draft resolution will resume according to the general speakers’ list. A
passed amendment shall be treated as an integral part of the draft resolution under debate. The vote
on an amendment is procedural in nature; hence no Member State including observers shall
abstain.
Amendments to amendments are out of order; however, an amended part of a resolution may be
further amended. Perambulatory phrases may not be amended. The amendment will require a
majority vote from the members that are declared present or present and voting to pass and being a
substantive matter, abstentions will be in order.
IV. POINTS AND DELEGATE RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
29. Appeal of the Chair's Decision:
A Delegate may Appeal some decisions of the Chair, with the exception of those matters that are
herein explicitly designated not subject to Appeal. The Appeal must occur immediately after the
Chair's decision, and the delegate raising the point cannot speak against the Chair. The Chair is
allowed to briefly explain their decision after which the Appeal shall be put to a vote and the
Decision of the Chair shall stand unless overruled by 2/3 of the Delegates present and voting.
30. Point of Information:
A Delegate may rise to a Point of Information to the speaker after a speaker has finished but still
has the floor, and if he has declared himself open to such points. A Point of Information is a
question - a request for information from the Speaker. It is a short statement followed by a short
question, or simply a short question. The Chair has the right to limit the Points of Information.
Delegates may also rise to Point of Information to the Chair to inquire about non-parliamentary
procedure questions - such a point is only in order when the floor is open.
31. Follow-Up Questions:
At the discretion of the Chair, a Delegate may ask for a Follow-Up Question after asking a Speaker
a Point of Information. This decision by the Chair is not subject to Appeal. Typically, the Chair
will allow a Follow-Up Question if time permits and if the Speaker has not properly answered the
first Point of Information.
32. Point of Parliamentary Procedure:
In Committee, during the discussion of any matter, when the floor is open, a Delegate may rise to
direct a Point of Inquiry to the Chair concerning Parliamentary Procedure. The Chair shall answer
the Inquiry in accordance with the Rules of Procedure. A Point of Parliamentary Procedure may
not interrupt a Speaker.
33. Point of Personal Privilege:
In Committee, whenever a Delegate experiences personal discomfort which impairs his or her
ability to follow the proceedings, that Delegate may Rise to a Point of Personal Privilege in the
hope that the source of discomfort will be corrected or removed. While a Point of Personal
Privilege may interrupt a Speaker, Delegates should use this prerogative with the utmost discretion
and usually only a Point of Personal Privilege due to lack of audibility will be entertained whilst
the speaker is speaking.
34. Point of Order:
After the discussion of any manner, a Delegate may rise to a Point of Order to complain of
improper parliamentary procedure by the Chair or other Delegates. The Chair in accordance with
these Rules shall immediately decide the Point of Order. A Delegate rising to a Point of Order may
not speak on the Substance of the matter under consideration. The Chair may, without subject to
appeal, rule Out of Order those points which in his or her judgment are dilatory, absurd, improper,
or frivolous.
35. Withdrawal of Motions:
Delegates may withdraw a Motion at any time before voting on the Motion has commenced,
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY MODEL UNITED NATIONS
RULES OF PROCEDURE
Page 7 of 10
provided that the body has not Amended it. Any Delegates may reintroduce a Motion thus
withdrawn. If a Motion has more than one Sponsor, all must agree on the decision to withdraw.
Those Delegates who have signed a Substantive Motion, but who are not considered Sponsors,
have no choice in a decision to withdraw the Motion.
36. Responsibilities of Delegates:
Each Delegate has the responsibility of conducting him/herself in a diplomatic manner.
Undiplomatic conduct will be looked upon with extreme disfavour by the Secretariat. Violation of
this rule may lead to immediate expulsion from the current function.
37. Courtesy:
All Delegates will be expected to show courtesy and respect to those speaking. Those who refuse
may be dealt with at the Chair's discretion.
38. Dilatory, Absurd, or Frivolous Acts:
The Chair may rule a Delegate Out of Order because of Dilatory, Absurd, or Frivolous actions.
That particular Delegate may not appeal the ruling of the Chair, but another delegate in the
committee may. If this Appeal does not receive the support of 2/3 of the Delegates voting, then
both Delegates will be deemed Out of Order and may be denied all privileges to address the
Committee or the General Assembly or to make any Motion while that item of the Agenda under
consideration remains before the Committee. They shall be accorded the right to vote on Motions
under consideration.
39. Warning System:
The Chair or the Secretary General may at any time at his or her discretion place a warning on a
Delegate for actions considered undiplomatic. The Warning System follows as such:
1st Warning
2nd Warning
3rd Warning
No penalty
No speaking or voting privileges
Removal of Delegate from the room
40. Right to Reply:
All requests for 'Right to Reply' will be dealt with in the following manner:
A. Any Delegate whose personal or national integrity has been insulted should immediately
stand as soon as the "alleged" offensive statement has been made.
B. The Delegate should not speak.
C. Upon completion of the speech in which the "perceived" insult occurred, the Chair or the
Secretary General will then recognize the Delegate, and at their discretion, make a ruling. If
the ruling is affirmative, the offended Delegate will speak from their desk.
D. The Right to Reply is limited to 30 seconds.
41. Recess:
'Recess' means suspension of committee functions until a time designated by the body. At any
time, a Delegate may Move to Recess the session. The Motion shall immediately be put to a vote; a
majority is necessary for passage. The Chair may rule a Motion to Recess as Out of Order and such
a ruling is non-appealable. A Motion to Recess should contain the amount of time proposed for the
Recess. Delegates are reminded that Recess is different from Adjournment.
42. Note Passing:
Delegates will be permitted to pass notes during the sessions, and are encouraged to do so on
official note paper. Notes must be: (1) signed on the inside by the Delegate sending the note and
(2) properly addressed on the outside to the receiving Delegate. Note passing is not allowed during
voting. Notes may be ruled Dilatory, Absurd, or Frivolous, and the Delegate may lose his/her note
passing privileges if the chair determines them as such.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY MODEL UNITED NATIONS
RULES OF PROCEDURE
Page 8 of 10
V. VOTING
43. Voting:
Each Delegate has one vote. Only member states of the United Nations may vote on substantive
motions. For voting on resolutions, committee quorum is required. Once voting begins, the doors
are sealed and delegates are not allowed to move in or out of the committee.
On resolutions and amendments, each delegate can vote ‘for’ (in support), ‘against’ (in protest) or
they can ‘abstain’ (which will be counted as a negative vote although indicating a ‘non-vote’). To
abstain, at the opening of the committee the delegate must have announced themselves to be
present, not present and voting.
On procedural motions, delegates may only vote ‘for’ and ‘against’.
A show of placards will determine voting patterns except in the case of a roll call vote. A simple
majority vote requires more ‘yes’ votes than ‘no’ votes, while a two-thirds vote requires at least
twice as many ‘yes’ votes than ‘no’ votes.
In all GA committees and ECOSOC, resolutions and amendments will require a simple majority to
pass. The only exception to this rule will be in the General Assembly when considering “important
questions” as highlighted by the UN Charter, primarily “recommendations with respect to the
maintenance of international peace and security” and “budgetary questions”, where a two-thirds
majority is required for a resolution to pass.
In the Expanded Security Council, all final resolutions and amendments will require the affirmative
vote of at least 15 members of the Council, including the 5 non-negative votes of the permanent
members. Procedural motions require the affirmative votes of at least 15 members to pass.
In the Historical Security Council, all final resolutions and amendments will require the affirmative
vote of at least 9 members of the Council, including the 5 non-negative votes of the permanent
members. Procedural motions require the affirmative votes of at least 9 members to pass.
44. Roll Call Votes:f
Roll Call votes shall be taken in alphabetical order beginning with a Delegate chosen by the Chair.
Delegates shall answer the Roll Call with either 'Yes', 'No', or 'Abstain'. Once voting has
commenced, no Delegate may interrupt. The voting procedure is considered to begin with the
calling of the first Delegate on the Roll, and does not end until the outcome has been announced.
VI. SPECIAL RULES FOR HISTORIC SECURITY COUNCIL (AS ADOPTED
FROM UKMUN)
45. Membership:
The membership of the historical committee shall correspond to the time period in which the issue
was considered.
46. Original Situation:
The basis of discussions in the historical committee will be a given and true historical situation, as
outlined in the official CUIMUN / UKMUN topic guides.
47. Relevant Special Powers of the Secretariat:
Only the Secretariat will possess the power to directly influence events outside of the committee
room, and shall do so taking into consideration the course of action proposed by delegates during
debate.
48. Historical Relevance:
Delegates will be required to take the historical situation presented at various intervals by the
UKMUN Secretariat as given, including the initial situation rooted in history, and will be out of order
if they stray away from this status quo. This implies that they are to represent their given delegation’s
stance as accurately as possible within a historical mindset given the information the UKMUN
Secretariat furnishes them with.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY MODEL UNITED NATIONS
RULES OF PROCEDURE
Page 9 of 10
VII. ORDER OF PRECEDENCE FOR POINTS AND MOTIONS
1. POINT OF PERSONAL PRIVILEGE - RULE 33
2. POINT OF ORDER - RULE 34
3. POINT OF PARLIAMENTARY INQUIRY - RULE 32
4. POINT OF INFORMATION TO THE CHAIR / SPEAKER - RULE 30
5. RIGHT OF REPLY - RULE 40
6. APPEAL FROM THE DECISION OF THE CHAIR - RULE 29
7. OPEN SPEAKERS LIST - RULE 13
8. CLOSE SPEAKERS LIST - RULE 14
9. RECESS - RULE 41
10. MODERATED CAUCUS - RULE 20
11. UNMODERATED CAUCUS - RULE 21
12. TABLING A SUBSTANTIVE MOTION - RULE 22
13. RESUMPTION OF DEBATE ON A SUBSTANTIVE MOTION - RULE 23
14. CLOSURE OF DEBATE - RULE 19
15. AMENDMENTS - RULE 28
16. RESOLUTION - RULE 27
17. ADJOURNMENT OF DEBATE - RULE 24
18. RECONSIDERATION OF A SUBSTANTIVE MOTION - RULE 26
19. RECONSIDERATION OF AGENDA ITEM - RULE 25
