Sydney University Schools’ Model United Nations
Rules of Procedure
(Updated July 16, 2007)


Outline


The aim of each delegation is to write and pass amendments that make the resolution more reflective of their country’s stance on the issue, while gaining enough support to have the resolution passed at the end. Neither amendments nor the resolution can be passed without the support of the majority of the committee, so finding common ground is important.
The resolution, published in advance, will form the general centrepiece of the debate. Delegates will begin by discussing it, and will return to discussing it whenever there are no amendments to be considered. When a resolution is passed, the committee has succeeded, and that is the end of proceedings. When a vote on a resolution fails, the committee will keep discussing it. With sufficient willingness to compromise, all committees should be able to pass a resolution by the end of the day, although it is important to make sure your country’s view is properly represented in the final resolution, rather than rushing to a vote.

Delegates take action by writing and gathering support for amendments. Many different amendments, cooperating or competing with each other, may be introduced, discussed and voted upon in turn. When an amendment is voted upon, and passes or fails, debate immediately moves on to the next proposed amendment. 


Position Statements


1.	At the beginning of the first committee session, each delegation will have the right to make a Position Statement briefly outlining their country’s stance on the issue and the proposed resolution. Position Statements will not exceed 2 minutes in length.


Formal Debate and Speaking Lists


2.	During periods of formal debate on amendments and resolutions, speaking lists exist to determine the order in which speakers address the committee. A speaking list will be drawn up:
a.	At the commencement of formal debate on the resolution after Position Statements
b.	Whenever an amendment is introduced.

3.	At these times, the Directors will call for a speaking list. Delegates will raise their placard to indicate that they wish to speak, specifying whether they are For or Against the resolution or amendment under debate. Nations will speak in turn alternating between For and Against.

4.	The first speaker to an amendment shall be its sponsor. Before giving his/her speech, the sponsor will read out the proposed amendment and answer any Points of Clarification that may arise.

5.	After the speaking list is first taken, delegates may request to be added  to the end of the list by passing a note to the Directors. If that delegate has already spoken, addition to the speaking list will be at the Directors’ discretion, with the aim of achieving an equitable distribution of speakers among all participating delegates, and between speakers “For” and “Against”.

6.	Debate will continue until the speaking list is exhausted or a motion is passed to Take Vote.


Speeches and Points of Information


7.	Speeches should be made through the Directors. It is inappropriate to directly address another delegate, although speakers may of course attack or defend particular remarks made by a delegate.

8.	Speeches will be subject to time limits specified by the Directors, which will be made known to speakers before they begin. If a speaker finishes before the time limit is up, he/she may yield any remaining time to another delegate on the speaking list, who can add it to his/her own speech.

9.	After giving a speech (except a Position Statement), a delegate will indicate to the Directors whether he/she is willing to accept questions from the committee in the form of points of information.

10.	If Points of Information are accepted, any delegates wishing to ask a question should raise their placard. If the Directors recognise a delegate, he/she will stand to ask the Point of Information.

11.	Points of Information should be used to question speakers about their stance on substantive issues of debate. They should be brief, to the point, and in the form of a genuine question, not a leading statement.


Amendments


12.	A delegate may move to amend the resolution, by editing or deleting existing clauses, or adding entirely new ones. Amendments must be submitted in writing to the Directors.

13.	An amendment must have a sponsor who will introduce it to the committee, and three other signatories, being delegates who support the amendment at the time of its introduction. Once an amendment is introduced, withdrawal of support by a sponsor or signatory does not automatically remove it from debate, and although they are strongly discouraged from doing so, signatories are free to vote against the amendment when it is put to a vote.

14.	The Directors may rule an amendment out of order if it is similar in substance to one already introduced and rejected.

15.	An amendment under debate cannot itself be amended, except to correct spelling and grammar. However, successfully amended text in the resolution may be re-examined, subject to Rule 14 about the reintroduction of multiple similar amendments.

16.	The introduction of an amendment suspends debate on the resolution until the amendment is voted upon. A vote on an amendment will occur when the amendment’s speaking list is exhausted or when a Motion to Vote on it is passed by the committee.

17.	If an amendment is voted upon and passes, the changes will be immediately incorporated into the resolution. If an amendment is voted upon and fails, debate will move to the next submitted amendment, or if there are none, back to general debate on the resolution.


Voting


18.	
a.	All delegations (each team of two) shall be entitled to one vote.
b.	On substantive matters (amendments and the resolution), delegates may vote “For”, “Against”, or “Abstain”.
c.	On procedural matters (motions to Take Vote or to Caucus), delegates may vote “For” or “Against”.
d.	Votes shall be decided by a simple majority of those delegations present and voting “For” or “Against” – abstentions are not counted.
e.	For the Security Council, votes on substantive matters may only pass if no “Against” votes are recorded from the five permanent members: France, People’s Republic of China, Russian Federation, United Kingdom and United States of America. Procedural matters are decided in the normal simple majority way.

 
Procedural Points and Motions


19.	Point of Order: A delegate may rise to a Point of Order to complain of improper procedure. The Director shall immediately decide a Point of Order. This point may interrupt a speaker. Points of Order should be made with discretion, with a genuine belief in their validity.

20.	Point of Procedural Enquiry: A delegate may make queries about procedure to the Directors by asking a Point of Procedural Enquiry. This point may not interrupt a speaker, and where not requiring immediate clarification of procedure, should be submitted by passing a note to the Directors.

21.	Point of Clarification: Immediately after a newly introduced amendment is read out by its sponsor, a delegate may ask the sponsor a Point of Clarification if the spelling, grammar or meaning of part of the amendment is unclear. This point may not interrupt the speaker; the Directors will ask the committee for Points of Clarification at the appropriate time. Substantive debate should not occur within Points of Clarification.

22.	Motion to Caucus: 
a.	While the committee is engaged in formal debate (that is, hearing speeches from a speaking list), a delegate may move a Motion to Caucus for a specified time limit. This motion may not interrupt a speaker.
b.	The Directors may choose not to entertain the motion, or to modify the proposed time.
c.	No speaker For or Against are necessary. The motion will be put directly to a vote. If the motion passes, formal debate will be suspended temporarily and the committee will move into caucus, where delegates can move about the room and informally discuss the issues.

23.	Motion to Take Vote: 
a.	While the committee is engaged in formal debate (that is, hearing speeches from a speaking list) on an amendment or the resolution, a delegate may move a Motion to Take Vote on the amendment or resolution being debated. This motion may not interrupt a speaker.
b.	The Directors may choose not to entertain such a motion if they deem insufficient debate has occurred, or if it is out of order – for example, moving to Take Vote on the resolution while the committee is discussing an Amendment.
c.	The proposer shall speak For the motion, and one other delegate may speak Against it. A vote will be taken on the motion itself – i.e. delegates vote For, to stop discussion and take a vote on the issue at hand, or Against, to keep discussing the issue. 
d.	If the motion fails, debate continues as normal.
e.	If the motion passes and refers to an amendment, no further speeches from the current speaking list will be heard, and the amendment under debate will be put immediately to a vote.
f.	If the motion passes and refers to the resolution, the resolution will be put immediately to a vote. If the resolution passes, that is the end of committee proceedings. If the resolution fails, the resolution speaking list will continue.


Directors and Committee Environment


24.	Directors:
a.	Each committee shall have two Directors. 
b.	Directors have discretionary powers to direct the committee’s discussions, ensure observance of the rules of procedure, entertain or refuse motions or amendments, accord delegates the right to speak, and administer votes. 
c.	Subject to the rules, they shall have complete control of the proceedings and maintenance of order at any meeting. 
d.	They may set limitations of time to be allowed to speakers, and the number of speakers for any issue. They can also recess or adjourn the session at their discretion.
 
25.	Note-passing:
a.	Communication with other delegations should be by note-passing, except during caucus time when the rules are suspended and talking and discussion are allowed. 
b.	To pass a note, write the name of the destination country and the name of your country on the front of your folded note, then give it to the country next to you, who will pass it on.
c.	Unless specified by the writer, notes are confidential and should not be read by people passing them on. 
d.	Notes may also be passed to the Director about procedural matters, request addition to a speaking list, or simply to ask them general questions.

26.	Conduct system:
a.	The Director may deliver a warning to any delegation that the Director feels is persistently out of order, acting undiplomatically, or severely misrepresenting the foreign policy of the country they represent.
b.	The penalty system is:
1st warning: no penalty
2nd warning: the delegation loses their voting rights for the committee session
3rd warning: the delegation loses their speaking rights for the committee session

