1
I. General Rules
Rule 1
- Duties of the Secretariat -
The Secretariat shall receive, print, and distribute documents, reports, and resolutions of the
Committee, and shall distribute documents of the Committee to the members of the United
Nations, and generally perform all other work, which the Committee may require.
For purposes of these rules, the Committee Directors, the Assistant Directors and the Under-
Secretary Generals are designates and agents of the Secretary General, and are collectively
referred to as the ‘Secretariat’.
Rule 2
- Arbitration-
Interpretation of the rules shall be reserved exclusively to the Secretary General or designated
members of the Secretariat. Such interpretation shall be in accordance with the philosophy and
principles of Oxford International Model United Nations, and in furtherance of its educational
mission.
Rule 3
- Language -
English will be the official and working language of the conference.
Rule 4
- Interpretation -
Any representative wishing to address any United Nations body or submit a document in a
language other than English shall provide translation into English.
This rule does not affect the total speaking time allotted to those representatives wishing to
address the body in a language other than English. As such, both the speech and the translation
must be within the set time limit.
Rule 5
- Courtesy -
Delegates shall show courtesy and respect to other delegates and the Secretariat. The committee
Director will immediately call to order any delegate who fails to comply with this rule.
Rule 6
- Participation of Non-Members -
Representatives of accredited observers will have the same rights as those of full members, except
that they may not sign or vote on resolutions. A representative of an organisation that is not a
member of the United Nations or an accredited observer may address a Committee only with the
prior approval of the Director.
For the purpose of these rules all observers are allowed to vote on any procedural matter, but
shall not cast a vote on substantial issues. The only substantial issue is the final vote on a
resolution or a part thereof divided out under provision of Rule 44.
2
Rule 7
- Invitation to silent prayer or meditation -
Immediately after the opening of the first plenary meeting and immediately preceding the closing
of the final plenary meeting of each session of the Committee, the Director may invite the
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. A formal request for
silent prayer or meditation shall be made in writing to the Director prior to the opening of the first
plenary session or during the final meeting of the Committee.
II. Rules Governing the Agenda
Rule 8
- Provisional Agenda -
The provisional Agenda shall be drawn up by the Secretary General and communicated to
members of the United Nations at least thirty days before the opening of the session.
Rule 9
-Attendance-
At the beginning of each session Committee Directors will call on Member States in English
alphabetical order to state their status of attendance. Member States may reply ‘present’ or
‘present and voting’, where ‘present and voting’ means the Member State cannot abstain on the
substantive vote.
For purposes of these rules, members ‘present or present and voting’ means those Member States
(not including observers) in attendance at the session during which this motion comes to vote.
Rule 10
- Setting the Agenda -
The first order of business for the Committee will be the consideration of the Agenda. A motion
should be made to put an Agenda Item first. This motion requires a second. If no delegate wishes
to oppose the motion, it shall be considered adopted. If there is opposition, a speakers’ list will be
established for and against the motion.
A motion to close debate will be in order after the Committee has heard two speakers for the
motion and two against; or, in case only one delegate wishes to oppose the motion, one speaker
for and one speaker against the motion shall be considered where after a motion to close debate
shall be entertained. In accordance with the procedure described in Rule 17, the Director will
recognise two speakers against the motion to close debate, and a vote of two-thirds in favour is
required for closure of debate on the Agenda.
When debate is closed, the Committee will move to an immediate vote on the motion. A simple
majority of all members present or present and voting is required for passage. If the motion fails,
the other Agenda Item will automatically be placed first on the Agenda.
In the event of an international crisis or emergency, the Secretary General or his or her
representative may call upon a Committee to table debate on the current Agenda Item so that the
more urgent matter may be attended to immediately. After a resolution has been passed on the
crisis topic, the Committee will return to debate on the tabled Agenda Item. If a resolution on the
crisis topic fails, the Committee may return to debate on the tabled Agenda Item only at the
discretion of the Secretary General or his or her representative.
The vote described in this rule is a procedural vote and hence all delegates will be required to
cast a vote. There shall be no abstentions.
3
III. Committee Rules
Rule 11
- General Powers of the Committee Directors -
In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon him or her elsewhere by these rules, the
Director shall declare the opening and closing of each meeting of the Committee, direct the
discussions, ensure observance of these rules, accord the right to speak, put questions to the vote
and announce decisions. The Director, subject to these rules, shall have complete control of the
proceedings of the Committee and over the maintenance of order at its meetings. He or she shall
rule on points of order. He or she may propose to the Committee the closure of the list of
speakers, a limitation on the time to be allowed to speakers and on the number of times the
delegate of each Member State may speak on an item, the adjournment or closure of the debate,
and the suspension or adjournment of a meeting. The Director may temporarily transfer his duties
to another member of the Secretariat. Committee Directors may also advise delegates on the
possible course of debate. In the exercise of these functions, the Committee directors will be at all
times subject to these rules and responsible to the Secretary General.
Included in these enumerated powers is the Directors’ power to assign speaking times for all
speeches incidental to motions and amendments. Further, the Director is to use his or her
discretion, upon the advice of the Secretariat, to determine whether to entertain a particular
motion based on the philosophy and principles of OxIMUN. Such discretion should be used on a
limited bases in order to advance the progress of debate.
Rule 12
- Appeal -
The Director, in the exercise of his or her functions, remains under the authority of the
Committee. A delegate may appeal any decision of the Director, with the exception of those
matters that are explicitly stated not to be open to appeal. The Director may speak briefly in
defence of the ruling. The appeal will then be put to a vote, and the decision of the Director will
stand unless overruled by a majority of those members present or present and voting. The
Director’s decision not to approve a resolution or amendment is never appealable. A ‘Yes’ vote
indicates support of the Director’s ruling; a ‘No’ vote indicates opposition to that ruling. The
Director’s ruling will stand unless overruled by a majority of ‘No’ votes.
The Director’s ruling on Unmoderated Caucus (Rule 15), Moderated Caucus (Rule 16), Closure
of Debate (Rule 17), Adjournment of the Meeting (Rule 21), Adjournment of Debate (Rule22) and
Right of Reply (Rule 30) are not open to appeal.
The vote described in this rule is a procedural vote and hence all delegates will be required to
cast a vote. There shall be no abstentions.
Rule 13
- Statements by the Secretariat -
The Secretary General or a member of the Secretariat designated by him or her may, at any time,
make either written or oral statements to the Committee.
Rule 14
- Quorum -
The Director may declare a Committee open and permit debate to proceed when at least one- third
of the members of the Committee are present. The presence of delegates of a majority of the
Member States of the body concerned shall be required for any decision on a substantive motion
to be taken. A quorum will be assumed to be present unless specifically challenged and shown to
be absent by a role call.
For purposes of this rule, ‘members of Committee’ and ‘member States of the body’ are based on
the number of members not including observers in attendance at the opening session.
4
IV. Rules Governing Debate
Rule 15
- Debate -
After the Agenda has been determined, one continuously open speakers’ list will be established
for the purpose of general debate. This speakers’ list will be followed for all debate on the Agenda
Item, except when superseded by procedural motions or a debate on amendments. Speakers may
speak generally on the Agenda Item being considered and may address any resolution currently
on the floor.
Rule 16
-Unmoderated Caucus -
A motion to caucus is in order at any time when the floor is open, prior to closure of debate. The
delegate making the motion must briefly explain its purpose and specify a time limit for the
caucus, not to exceed twenty minutes. The motion will immediately be put to a vote. A majority
of members present or present and voting is required for passage. The Director may rule the
motion out of order and his or her decision is not subject to appeal.
Rule 17
- Moderated Caucus -
The purpose of the moderated caucus is to facilitate substantive debate at critical junctures in the
discussion. In a moderated caucus, the Director will temporarily depart from the speakers’ list and
call on delegates to speak at his or her discretion. A motion for a moderated caucus is in order at
any time when the floor is open, prior to closure of debate. The delegate making the motion must
briefly explain its purpose and specify a time limit for the caucus, not to exceed twenty minutes,
and a time limit for the individual speeches. Once raised, the motion will be voted on
immediately, with a majority of members present or present and voting required for passage. The
Director may rule the motion out of order and his decision is not subject to appeal.
Rule 18
- Closure of Debate -
A delegate may at any time move the closure of debate on the item currently under discussion,
both substantive and procedural, whether or not any other delegate has signified his or her wish to
speak. Permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded only to two delegates opposing the
closure, after which the motion shall be put to the vote immediately. Closure of debate shall
require a two-thirds majority of the members present or present and voting. If the Committee
favours the closure of debate, the Committee shall immediately move to vote on all proposals
introduced under debate.
Rule 19
- Speakers’ List -
The Committee will have an open speakers’ list for the Agenda Item being discussed. Separate
speakers’ lists will be established as needed for procedural motions and debate on amendments. A
Member State may add its name to the speakers’ list by submitting a request in writing to the
Directors, provided that Member State is not already on the speakers’ list. The names of the next
several Member States to speak will always be posted for the convenience of the Committee. The
speakers’ list for the second Agenda Item will not be open until the Committee has proceeded to
that Agenda Item.
The decision to announce the list of speakers is within the discretion of the Director and should
not be the subject of a motion by the Committee.
5
Rule 20
- Closure of the Speakers’ List -
At any point during debate a delegate may move to close the speakers’ list. Such motion shall not
be debated, but put to an immediate vote, requiring the support of a majority of the members
present or present and voting to pass. A closed speakers’ list can be reopened at any time prior to
voting procedures by a simple majority of all members present or present and voting. When there
are no more speakers, the Director shall declare the debate closed. Such closure shall have the
same effect as closure by decision of the Committee under Rule 17.
A motion to close the speaker’s list is within the purview of the Committee and the Director
should not on his own motion move the body.
Rule 21
- Suspension of the Meeting -
During the discussion of any matter, a delegate may move the suspension of the meeting,
specifying a time for reconvening. Such motions shall not be debated but shall be put to a vote
immediately, requiring the support of a majority of the members present or present and voting to
pass.
Rule 22
- Adjournment of the Meeting -
During the discussion of any matter, a delegate may move for adjournment of the meeting. Such
motions shall not be debated but shall be put to the vote immediately, requiring the support of a
majority of the members present or present and voting to pass. After adjournment, the Committee
shall reconvene at its next regularly scheduled meeting time in November 2005.
As this motion, if successful, would end the meeting until the Committee’s next regularly
scheduled meeting, the Director will not entertain such a motion until the end of the last session
of the Committee.
Rule 23
- Adjournment of Debate -
A delegate may at any time move the adjournment of debate on the Agenda Item under
discussion. Permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded only to two delegates favouring
and two opposing the adjournment, or in case only one delegate wishes to oppose the motion, one
speaker for and one speaker against the motion shall be considered where after the motion shall be
put to a vote immediately, requiring the support of a majority of the members present or present
and voting to pass. If a motion for adjournment passes, the Agenda Item is considered dismissed
and no action will be taken on it.
This motion, if successful, means that the Committee proceeds to the second Agenda Item under
discussion.
The Director may at his or her discretion rule this motion out of order, if the Committee has
already moved to the second Agenda Item. The decision of Director is not open to appeal.
For the purpose of this rule the term ‘Agenda Item’ solely refers to the two Agenda Items set by
the Secretary General.
Rule 24
- Reconsideration of an Agenda Item-
When an Agenda Item has been adjourned, it may not be reconsidered at the same session unless
the Committee, by a two-thirds majority of those present or present and voting, so decides.
Reconsideration can only be moved by a delegate who voted on the prevailing side of the original
motion to adjourn. Permission to speak on a motion to reconsider shall be accorded only to two
speakers opposing the motion, after which it shall be put to a vote immediately.
6
Rule 25
- Postponement of Debate -
Whenever the floor is open, a delegate may move for the postponement of debate on a resolution
or amendment currently on the floor. The motion, otherwise known as ‘tabling,’ will require a
two-thirds vote to pass and will be debatable to the extent of one speaker in favour and one
opposed. No debate or action will be allowed on any resolution or amendment on which debate
has been postponed.
Rule 26
- Resumption of Debate -
A motion to resume debate on an amendment or resolution on which debate has been postponed
will require a majority to pass and will be debatable to the extent of one speaker in favour and one
opposed. Resumption of debate will cancel the effects of postponement of debate.
Rule 27
- Reconsideration of a Proposal -
A motion to reconsider is in order when a resolution or amendment has been adopted or rejected,
and must be made by a member who voted with the majority on the substantive proposal. The
Director will recognise two speakers opposing the motion after whom the motion will be
immediately put to a vote. A two-thirds majority of the members present or present and voting is
required for reconsideration.
V. Rules Governing Speech
Rule 28
- Speeches -
No delegate may address a session without having previously obtained the permission of the
Director. The Director may call a speaker to order if his or her remarks are not relevant to the
subject under discussion, or are offensive to Committee members or Secretariat. The Director
may at his discretion call a delegate to order if his or her speech is to be considered personally
offensive or infringes upon the sovereignty of a Member State.
Rule 29
- Time-Limit on Speeches -
The Director may limit the time allotted to each speaker. The minimum time-limit will be ten
seconds. When a delegate exceeds the allotted time, the Director may call the speaker to order.
Rule 30
- Yields -
A delegate granted the right to speak on a substantive issue may yield in one of three ways:
• Yield to another delegate. His or her remaining time will be given to that delegate, who may not,
however, make any further yields.
• Yield to questions. Questioners will be selected by the Director and limited to one question each.
The Director will have the right to call to order any delegate whose question is, in the opinion of
the Director, rhetorical and leading and/or not designed to elicit information. Only the speaker’s
answers to questions will be deducted from the speaker’s remaining time.
• Yield to the chair. Such a yield should be made if the delegate does not wish to yield to
questions or another delegate. The Director will then move to the next speaker.
Delegates must declare any yield by the conclusion of his or her speech. If time runs out, the
Director will simply move on to the next speaker.
7
Rule 31
- Right of Reply -
A delegate whose national integrity has been impugned by another delegate may request a Right
of Reply. The Director shall determine an appropriate time limit for the reply. The Director’s
decision whether to grant the Right of Reply is not open to appeal. A Right of Reply to a Right of
Reply is out of order.
For purposes of this rule, a remark that impugns a delegate’s ‘national integrity’ is one directed
at the governing authority of that Member State and/or one that puts into question that Member
State’s sovereignty or a portion thereof.
VI. Points
Rule 32
- Point of Personal Privilege -
Whenever a delegate experiences personal discomfort, which impairs his or her ability to
participate in the proceedings, he or she may rise to a Point of Personal Privilege to request that
the discomfort be corrected. While a Point of Personal Privilege may interrupt a speaker,
delegates should use this power with the utmost discretion.
Rule 33
- Point of Order -
During the discussion of any matter, a delegate may rise to a Point of Order to indicate an
instance of improper parliamentary procedure. A delegate may not, in rising to a Point of Order,
speak on the substance of the matter under discussion.
The Point of Order will be immediately ruled on by the Director in accordance with these rules of
procedure. The ruling of the Director shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the members
present or present and voting.
Such Points of Order may under no circumstances interrupt the speech of a fellow delegate. Any
questions on order arising during a speech made by a delegate should be raised at the conclusion
of the speech, or can be addressed by the Director, at his or her discretion, during the speech.
Rule 34
- Points of Parliamentary Inquiry -
When the floor is open, a delegate may rise to a Point of Parliamentary Inquiry to ask the Director
a question regarding the rules of procedure. A Point of Parliamentary Inquiry may never interrupt
a speaker. Delegates with substantive questions should not rise to this Point, but should rather
approach the Committee Staff during caucus.
VII. Rules Governing Substantive Issues
Rule 35
- Working Papers -
Delegates may propose working papers for Committee consideration. Working papers are
intended to aid the Committee in its discussion and formulation of resolutions and need not be
written in resolution format. Working papers are not official documents, but do require the
approval of the Director to be copied and distributed.
Working papers do not require the signatures of one fifth of the delegates present or present and
voting.
8
Rule 36
- Draft Resolutions -
A draft resolution may be introduced when it receives the approval of the Director and is signed
by one-fifth of the number of delegations that are present or present and voting at the beginning
of the Committee session. Signing a resolution need not indicate support of the resolution, and the
signer has no further obligations.
There are no official sponsors of resolutions.
Rule 37
- Introducing a Draft Resolution -
Once a resolution has been approved as stipulated above and has been copied and distributed, a
delegate may rise to introduce the resolution. The content of such an introduction will be limited
to reading the operatives clauses of the resolution. Such an introduction will be considered
procedural in nature, and hence, yields are out of order. An immediate vote is taken, with a simple
majority required for the introduction of the resolution. More than one resolution may be on the
floor at any one time, but at most one resolution may be passed per Agenda item. Debate on
resolutions proceeds according to the Agenda Item general speakers’ list.
A resolution will remain on the floor until debate on that specific resolution is postponed or
closed or a resolution on that Agenda Item has been passed. A motion to introduce a resolution is
procedural in nature, and hence does not require a delegate to be on the speakers’ list.
Rule 38
- Withdrawing a Proposal -
A procedural motion or an amendment may be withdrawn by its signatory at any time before
voting has commenced, provided that it has not been amended. A motion or amendment thus
withdrawn may be reintroduced by any delegate.
For the purpose of this rules the sole ‘signatory’ of a procedural motion or an amendment is to be
interpreted as the delegate who proposed the motion or moved for the introduction of the
amendment. A draft resolution once approved by the Committee may not be withdrawn by the
delegate, who moved its introduction.
Rule 39
- Amendments -
An amendment is a proposal that does no more than add to, delete from or revise part of a draft
resolution. Delegates may amend any draft resolution, which has been introduced. Amendments
shall normally be submitted in writing to the Secretariat with the names of one-eighth of the
member states present or present and voting, including observers, in favour of the Committee
considering the amendment.
The Secretariat may, at its discretion, approve the proposal or amendment for circulation among
the delegates. As a general rule, no proposal shall be put to the vote at any meeting of the
Committee unless copies of it have been circulated to all delegates. The Director may, however,
permit the discussion and consideration of amendments, even though such amendments and
motions have not been circulated.
Amendments to amendments are out of order; however, an amended part of a resolution may be
further amended. Preambulatory phrases may not be amended.
There are no official sponsors of amendments or friendly amendments.
A delegate may move to introduce an approved amendment when the floor is open. An immediate
vote is taken, with a simple majority required for the introduction of the amendment. Once an
amendment is introduced to Committee, General Debate will be suspended and a speakers’ list
will be established for and against the amendment.
The motion to introduce an amendment is procedural in nature and does not require the delegate
9
to be on the speakers’ list. Debate on an amendment is substantial in nature; yields are thus in
order.
A motion to close debate will be in order after the Committee has heard two speakers for the
amendment and two against; or in case only one delegate wishes to oppose the motion, one
speaker for and one speaker against the motion shall be considered where after a motion to close
debate shall be entertained.
When debate is closed on the amendment, the Committee will move to an immediate vote. After
the vote, debate on the draft resolution will resume according to the general speakers’ list. A
passed amendment shall be treated as an integral part of the draft resolution under debate.
The vote on an amendment is procedural in nature; hence no Member State including observers
shall abstain.
Rule 40
- Competence -
A motion to question the competence of the Committee to discuss a resolution or an amendment
is in order only immediately after the resolution or amendment has been introduced. The motion
requires a majority to pass and is debatable to the extent of one speaker for and one against.
VIII. Rules Governing Voting
Rule 41
- Voting Rights -
Each member of the Committee, including observers, shall have one vote on procedural motion
including the vote on an amendment. Substantive votes on a resolution or a part thereof divided
out under provisions made in Rule 44, will be taken among the non-observer Members States
only.
Rule 42
- Voting -
Each country will have one vote. Each vote may be a ‘Yes’, ‘No’, or ‘Abstain’. Members ‘present
and voting’ will be defined as members casting an affirmative or negative vote. Members who
abstain from voting are considered as not voting. All matters will be voted upon by placards,
except in the case of a roll call vote. After the Director has announced the beginning of voting, no
delegate can interrupt the voting except on a Point of Personal Privilege or a Point of Order in
connection with the actual conduct of voting. A simple majority requires ‘Yes’ votes from more
than half the members present or present and voting; ties fail. A two-thirds vote requires at least
twice as many ‘Yes’ votes as ‘No’ votes.
Rule 43
- Request for a Vote -
A formal vote shall be taken for each proposal or motion before the Committee for decision
during voting procedures. The Committee, may, if no objection exists, adopt a proposal without
formal vote by acclimation.
For purposes of this rule, ‘proposal’ means any draft resolution, an amendment thereto, or a
portion of a draft resolution divided out by motion. For the purpose of this rule, ‘formal vote’
means a vote by a show of placards.
Just prior to a vote on a particular proposal or motion, the Director may ask if there are any
objections to passing the proposal or motion by acclimation, or a member may move to accept the
proposal or motion by acclimation. If there are no objections to the proposal or motion, then it is
adopted without vote. Any objection will be considered as a request for a vote. It is practice at
Oxford International Model United Nations that a formal vote shall be taken if neither the
10
Director or any delegate moves to adopt a proposal by acclimation.
Rule 44
- Order of Voting -
If two or more proposals relate to the same question, they shall, unless the Committee decides
otherwise, be voted on in order in which they were submitted.
For purposes of this rule, ‘proposal’ means any draft resolution, or a portion of a draft resolution
divided out by motion.
Rule 45
- Division of Question -
After debate on any resolution or amendment has been closed, a delegate may move that operative
parts of the proposal be voted on separately. Preambulatory clauses and sub-operative clauses
may not be separated by division of the question. If there are calls for multiple divisions, those
shall be voted upon in an order to be set by the Director where the most radical division will be
voted upon first.
The only substantive vote on a motion to divide the question is the final vote in the case of a
resolution. If the division of question is aimed at an amendment the final vote is procedural in
nature.
If there is opposition to the motion to divide the question, the motion shall be voted upon,
requiring the support of a majority of those present or present and voting to pass. Permission to
speak on the motion for division shall be given only to two speakers in favour and two speakers
against. If the motion receives the simple majority required to pass, the resolution or amendment
will be divided accordingly, and a separate procedural vote will be taken on each divided part to
determine whether or not it is included in the final draft.
Parts of the resolution or amendment that are subsequently passed will be recombined into a final
document and will be put to a substantive vote in the case of a resolution and a procedural vote in
the case of a amendment. The final vote requires a simple majority to pass. If all of the operative
parts of amendment or resolution are rejected, the proposal will be considered to have been
rejected as a whole.
For purposes of this rule, ‘most radical division’ means the division that will remove the greatest
substance from the draft resolution, but not necessarily the one that will remove the most words
or clauses.
Rule 46
- Majority required -
1. Unless specified otherwise in these rules, decisions of the Committee shall be made by a
majority of the members present or present and voting.
2. For the purpose of tabulation, the phrase members present or present and voting means
delegates casting an affirmative or negative vote. Delegates, who abstain from voting, are
considered as not voting.
Rule 47
- Method of voting -
The Committee shall normally vote by a show of placards, except that a delegate may request a
roll call, which shall be taken in the English alphabetical order of the names of the members,
beginning with the Member State whose name is randomly selected by the Director. The name of
each present Member State shall be called and one of its delegates shall reply ‘yes’, ‘no’,
‘abstention’, or ‘pass’.
A role call vote shall only be moved on a substantial vote.
Only those Member States, who designate themselves as ‘present’ or ‘present and voting’ during
the attendance roll call or in some other manner communicate their attendance to the Director
11
and/or Secretariat, are permitted to vote, and as such, no others will be called during a roll call
vote. Any representatives replying ‘pass’, must, on the second time through, respond with either
‘yes’ or ‘no’. A ‘pass’ cannot be followed by a second ‘pass’ for the same resolution, nor can it
be followed by an abstention on that same resolution.
Rule 48
- Explanation of vote -
Representatives may make brief statements consisting solely of the explanation of their votes after
the voting has been completed. A signatory of a proposal or motion shall not speak in explanation
of his or her vote thereon, except if it has been amended, and the member has voted against the
proposal or motion.
Any request for an explanations of vote must be submitted to the Director in writing before debate
on the Agenda Item is closed, except where the representative is signatory of the proposal, in
which case the Director may at his discretion grant the delegate the right to briefly address the
Committee immediately after voting on the Agenda Item has come to an end.
IX. Conduct of Business
Rule 49
- Precedence of Motions -
Motions will be considered in the following order of preference:
1. Parliamentary Points
a. Points that interrupt a speaker:
• Points of Personal Privilege (Rule 32)
b. Points that are in order only when the floor is open:
• Point of Order (Rule 33)
• Points of Parliamentary Inquiry (Rule 34),
2. Procedural motions that are not debatable:
a. Adjournment of the Meeting (Rule 22)
b. Suspension of the Meeting (Rule 21)
c. Caucusing (Rule 17)
d. Moderated Caucusing (Rule 18)
3. Procedural motions that are applicable to an Agenda Item, a resolution or amendment
under consideration:
a. Adjournment of Debate (Rule 23)
b. Closure of Debate (Rule 18)
c. Postponement of Debate (Rule 25)
d. Closure of speakers’ list (Rule 20)
e. Competence (Rule 40)
f. Division of the Question (Rule 45)
4. Substantive motions:
a. Amendments (Rule 39)
b. Resolution (Rules 36-37)
5. Other procedural motions:
a. Resumption of Debate (Rule 26)
b. Reconsideration of an Agenda Item (Rule 24)
c. Reconsideration of a proposal (Rule 27)
